Hello there.
This is De de La Rue.
And welcome back.
In this lecture, we will look at how we can install the latest version of Java on a Windows operating
system.
If you're using some other operating system, then you can skip this lecture and view the lecture corresponding
to that particular operating system, which should be one of the follow up lectures.
Demo in this lecture is shown on a Windows ten operating system, and the process would be very similar
on other Windows operating systems.
Now this demo involves two parts.
In the first part, we will install the latest version of Java, which is very easy.
And in the second part we will set an environment variable called path and that is needed if we have
to use the different development tools that come with the JDK.
So we are going to get into the details, a lot of detail configuration details and it is very important
to be aware of them as a good engineer.
It's not enough if you just install and start writing programs.
So we need to be aware of the configuration details like the pattern environment variable.
So let's just get started.
Search for JDK download and the first link is from Oracle and here are the Java downloads these versions.
If we are learning, then we can use them here.
We can use these installations that JDK installations, but you cannot use them for commercial purpose.
If you want to use for commercial purpose, you will have to pay.
But for learning it is fine and this is what we are going to use.
But if you want to use a completely free version for commercial purposes too, then we need to use the
open JDK as mentioned earlier for that.
Just search for open JDK download and here is the link.
You can click this one and here in the downloads.
The latest version as of today is Java 17.
So we just click that and download the zip version and you would just unzip and extract the folder and
you will have to store it on your file system and we will see where it needs to be done.
But for this demo we are not going to do this.
We will use the version from the Oracle website.
So JDK 17 has been released very recently.
So this is the web page, the downloads web page on Oracle.
So this is Java 17 and here it says that it is Lta's.
Ltsc stands for long term support.
So this particular Java 17 release is called as a long term support release and it will be supported
for almost eight years.
So if there are any bugs, then they will have new releases, new updates which will fix those bugs.
So that way it is supported for a long time and hence it's called as a long term support release.
The last long term support release was Java 11 and all the releases in between were non ltas.
So they were being released once every six months and they would be supported for only six months.
So here we have these three different versions.
So this is the latest version.
And when you are viewing this particular lecture, if you are seeing a different version, go ahead
and install the latest version that you see.
And the UI might also be different, but you should be able to get to the latest version.
Now, let me just scroll down here.
So here we have Java 16, Java 11, which is the previous LPs on Java eight two.
Now if you are using a 32 bit OS, which means that you are using an old machine, then you cannot install
any of the recent releases.
The last recent release that you can install is Java eight.
So that is that 32 bit OS and Java eight in general is good for this course because when this course
was first developed, Java eight was the latest release.
And so most of the programs will work with Java eight.
But the thing with Java, with Java is they ensure that the recent releases are backward compatible.
So if you install Java 17, then the programs that are compiled with Java eight will also run on that.
So backward compatibility is a very important priority and they guarantee that.
Now here Java eight, let me click that and there are the different operating systems.
Let me click on Windows.
So if yours is 32 bit, then you need to install this particular installer.
So you would click that you would download and when you double click it you would just follow the instructions
and it would be very straightforward.
So for 64 bit you would use this one.
Now if you are not sure whether you are using 64 bit or 32 bit, then we can easily find out.
If you're using an older machine, it would be 32, but it can be 32 bit.
So here under search, just search for system here.
So system here, this is the best match.
So in this particular screen, it says system type 64 bit operating system.
So that's mine.
But if yours is 32 bit, we'll show us 32 bit operating system and you will have to download that 32
bit version.
All right, so let's go back and.
Under Java 17 click on Windows and here.
So these are the this is the zip file and these are the two installers.
Just go for this x 64 installer, so download it and you can just execute it.
So I have already downloaded this one, so I'm just going to execute it.
Now in some older versions of Java release, they might ask you to create an account, so just go ahead
and create an account for Oracle, give your user email and password and then you can download.
But that's only for certain releases.
So I have already downloaded.
Just go ahead and do that.
So in my case here it is under downloads.
Just double click this one and hit the yes.
So this is the installation with that next.
So it says that it is JDK 1764 bit includes a private jetty and it's just a jetty within the development
kit with the folder and it includes the source code and it requires this much space and it is being
installed here.
So that's the standard location program files Java.
And within that this folder called JDK 17 gets created.
So you can just leave it as this.
And that's less than 30 seconds close.
Now, this was the open JDK that I downloaded.
Even here, if I double click it, it shows the JDK 17.
I can just copy it to that location, which which I have just shown under program files.
Java.
So you can just copy that.
But since we are not using that so we don't have to worry about this.
Now, let me minimize this.
Let's go ahead and look at what we have in JDK 17 folder.
So here it is under C Drive Program Files.
Let me click on See.
So this is program files.
If you are installing 32 bit for 32 bit, then it goes under program files x 86.
There you will see a folder called Java and within that you will see the JDK that you have downloaded
for 32 bit, but for 64 bit.
Here it is, program files, java and it got installed here.
So this is the directory of my JDK and I already have JDK 11 and JDK eight.
So let me click here.
So it has these let's go into bin folder.
So that's where we will have all of the executables, like the Java compiler, Java interpreter and
all the development tools that we need.
So here we have let me show you Java here.
So that's for compiling our programs.
Then there is the Java interpreter.
So this is another executable.
So that is for running our programs.
Java P is for it's called as a disk assembler.
If you want to look at the Java bytecode that your compiler generates, your compiler generates a dot
class file which has the Java bytecode.
If you want to examine that, you would use this tool.
Then the Jar tool is used for packaging your software.
So once you have the software, you can create something called as a jar file.
So that's a unit of release and that jar file, you can give it to your clients or partners.
So that's the Jar tool.
So these are all the development tools that you have here in the directory.
So now let me go ahead.
And so that's all there is to installation, but we need to set the path also.
So click search for CMD, the command prompt.
So the terminal on windows here.
So let me type in Java and version.
So this will execute the Java executable that we have here.
It uses that.
It says Java 17 is the latest version.
So similarly, if you say Java minus version, Java is the interpreter.
So it still gives the same information.
On both of these are here inside the Bing directory.
Now if you say Java P hyphen version, then it's not working.
C although java p is under bean here.
For this.
It's not recognizing, but for the other two commands it is doing it.
So that's because in the later releases, in the recent releases of Java, the environment variable
is being edited by the installer because we used an installer and it is copying the location for only
these two executables and I will show you that.
But for this we need to set the reset the path environment variable and that's the next thing that we
are going to do.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So to set the environment variables, what you can do is just search for system here.
So this is the one which we have done already.
We have because in order to see whether we are using a 32 bit OS or 64 bit OS, we have done that.
So that screen is here.
So in the screen, just click on this thing called Advanced System Settings.
Right.
Now here we are under the advanced tab.
So we clicked on the advanced system settings.
It opens this window called system properties and we are inside this advanced.
Here we have environment variables.
Click on that.
Now there are two sections here user variables for view and system variables.
So we can set it here or we can set it here.
If you set it here, it will be applicable only for this particular user who is using it.
And that is my account, which is zero.
But if it needs to be you set for all the users who are going to use this machine, then it needs to
go under system variables and I prefer to do it here, so we will do it here.
But the first thing I will do is before editing, you can see here the path environment variable.
It's also here.
But here what we are going to do is we will also add another environment variable called Java underscore.
It's called as Java underscore home and it's the root directory of where Java was installed and it will
be clear why that is needed here.
It's not here.
So we need to create a new one.
So just hit new button and we will say Java underscore home.
So we need to give the location of this Java underscore home and we know where it got installed.
So it was installed in Java and JDK 17.
So just click here in this address bar.
You will, you will see this path just say control C and go back to system settings and plug it as a
value for this.
So this is your home directory for Java or the root directory of Java.
So this is where it has been installed.
Click.
Okay.
Now for Pat, click on path here.
Click on Edit.
So the environment variable has all of these different values, so they are all actually internally
separated by semicolon.
So these are the paths and we need to add a new one.
And that new one would have to point to this JDK 17 and the bin folder because this is where we have
all the executables like the Java ACC, Java, Java, P and so on.
So it needs to be here.
So here now.
So we need to create a new one.
So just say new here.
Instead of copying that entire path, what we will do is we'll just say percentage Java, underscore
home percentage slash bin.
So what this is going to do is we already have the Java underscore home environment variable which we
have just set.
And because of using these percentage symbols here, it will act as a placeholder and it will take the
value of that and it will copy it here.
And we can also or we can copy the entire path, but we can just do that.
So this Java underscore home environment variable is acting as a placeholder here.
Now the next thing I want to do and important thing is to click on this move up button.
But this, this.
To the very top.
So among all the parts so this is the part.
This is the first part.
Now, what happened earlier was we you can recall that, you know, it worked on the command prompt.
It worked for Java Sea and Java Java Command, but not for Java.
P And the reason for that is the installer actually edited this pattern environment variable and added
this thing.
And here in this location, it made a copy of Java, Java and a couple of other executables, but not
the Java IP, the Java executable.
So let me just show you that location.
So it is also under program files, common files here.
This there is this oracle and then click on Java and here there is Java part.
So here are the different executables that it copied from the JDK 17 directory.
So it has only a few of them.
And that was the reason it worked for Java and Java C, but it did not work for Java P.
So this is a burn.
This happens only from Java 11 onwards, I believe.
But if you are using an older version, then you will not see this.
So which means that you must set a pattern environment variable.
It's only from Java.
11 onwards it started.
They started to do this so that.
So this is the path and it would have the latest version.
So we want to.
So this is something that we have set manually.
Say, for instance, you have installed Java 17, so you will have those things here.
Then if you want to use Java eight, which you have also installed, then you would have to you need
this and it needs to be the first one.
Otherwise what happens is for some of the executables, it will use this part and since this will come
later, if you did not move it to the front and it is for some other executables like the Java it would
pick from here.
So it is picking the executables from two different installations.
So the best thing is this is one this is the one that we want to use.
So just we will move it here and click.
Okay.
Now, one thing I want to mention here is so I clicked on path and I clicked on edit and we have seen
that screen.
Now if you are using Windows seven, it will not show this, but it will show a different screen where
all of these paths will be shown in one box and they will be separated by semicolons, in which case
you would have to go into the front of the path and add this one.
Maybe it would look something.
Yea, it would look something like this.
So you would go in the friend like I have clicked home and you would add this followed by semicolon.
So that's for Windows seven.
So let me click.
Okay, once again.
So Java underscore home has been created, path has been edited.
Now one of the thing is Java underscore home acted as an placeholder.
But there are some tools like Tomcat.
If you know, Tomcat is a web server for Tomcat to start the Tomcat Web server, it will also use Java,
underscore home environment variable.
Just to start it, we need that.
So Java underscore home environment variable is also useful outside of Java.
Now here, so we have this environment and the command prompt and but we made some changes in the environment
variable.
Now for those environment variables, they will not be reflected in this particular command prompt.
So we need to open a new prompt.
So always remember that.
And if you are doing this with me, make sure your opening.
A new command prompt.
Now, Jack, as usual.
It should work.
Now the other one, which did not work earlier, is Java, P and Java will also work.
Okay.
As you can see, all of these have been set.
Right.
So the.
So the command prompt is looking at the pattern environment variable and it is looking at that first
part which we edited, which we added, and it is able to look at all of these executables.
Now, one important thing I want to mention is so here Java underscore home is here and Patty's here.
Just make sure that both of these are here or both of these are here.
If you put Java underscore home over here and Path is edited here, then it's not going to work.
So both of these have to be here or here, and my recommendation is to add them here.
So that's that.
So now if you want to switch it to Java 11, because I already have Java 11, let me also show you that
and Java.
So this is what I have.
So let me click that to change it.
All we need to do is go back.
Environment variables.
Click on Java, underscore home, click edit this time because it's already there.
So this one has to be changed to JDK 11.
All right.
Okay.
We need to open a new command prompt now.
And now if I say Java hyphen version, it will give us Java 11.
So that's what it is.
So it got installed here.
Right.
We have these three different versions now.
If you want to uninstall, what you can do is over here.
Search for control panel.
Here it is.
And under control panel, we have this call, this link called Uninstall a Program.
And if you're here, you can see that I have Java eight, Java 11 and Java 17.
Click on Java 17 and say Uninstall and it will get uninstalled in just a few seconds.
It's gone.
And I already mentioned about the open JDK, which you can unzip.
You can take this Java 17 and you can copy it.
To this particular path where we have all the Java installations.
So that's open JDK.
Now the final thing that I want to show is.
Because some of you might be using Java eight.
So as mentioned in one of the earlier lectures until Java ten, the Java platform was also providing
this thing called as public.
So this is called as a public git.
So when you install, you get this JDK just like JDK 11 or JDK 17.
But additionally, they will also provide this JIRA, which could be used by some other programs like
a browser.
If it has Java, it can make use of this.
This continued from Java 11 onwards and within JDK also.
So this is the private Giri.
So this Private Giri, if I click here, there is this folder called LEP.
And here.
So this is JDK eight.
There is this thing called as Arti Jha.
Art stands for runtime and it's a jar file and that has most of the Java library classes.
I'm showing you this because this art jar is there in JDK eight, but it has been removed from JDK nine.
And from JDK nine onwards, they use this thing called as feature called Java module system.
So they changed the entire layout and this article has been removed.
It's just that it is packaged in a different way.
They call it as modules.
So that's the thing.
So you wouldn't see this private jar.
It is there.
It is just that it has been laid out in a different way.
So if you go into JDK 11, you will not see that private jar is there, but our PT jar is not there.
It's just that those files in our PT jar, the Java Library, have been packaged in a different way.
So no article from Java nine and no public Java from Java 11 onwards.
So that's a lot of information and good information that you need to know.
But using just the JDK 17 is very easy.
As we have seen, we installed it and we have set the path environment variable and we opened a new
command prompt and we can see the changes we made and we can compile and run our programs.
So that's about it.
Thank you and see you in the next lecture.